INTMDB-632: v1.10.0 CHANGELOG and Upgrade Guide Doc Updates (#1232)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: website/docs/guides/Programmatic-API-Key-upgrade-guide-1.10.0.html.markdown

---
layout: "mongodbatlas"
page_title: "Upgrade Guide for Terraform MongoDB Atlas Provider Programmatic API Key Resource in v1.10.0"
sidebar_current: "docs-mongodbatlas-guides-Programmatic-API-Key-upgrade-guide"
description: |-
MongoDB Atlas Provider : Upgrade and Information Guide
---

# MongoDB Atlas Provider: Programmatic API Key Upgrade Guide in v1.10.0

> In Terraform MongoDB Atlas Provider v1.10.0, some improvements were introduced which mainly focus on the MongoDB Atlas Programmatic API Keys (PAK) handling. This guide will help you to transition smoothly from the previous version which this resource was first released (v1.8.0) to the new version (v1.10.0).

Reviewer: Not blocking but suggest giving a bit of info about why we are doing this. Doesn't have to be a long explanation but perhaps something like: 
```suggestion
In Terraform MongoDB Atlas Provider v1.10.0, some improvements were introduced which mainly focus on the MongoDB Atlas Programmatic API Keys (PAK) handling. The improvements introduce a much more sustainable way to manage PAK project assignment lifecycle over the long term versus being embedded in the project resource.  This guide will help you to transition smoothly from the previous version which this resource was first released (v1.8.0) to the new version (v1.10.0).
```
The reason for this is we are asking for a work here to move forward - it's much better and less likely to cause issues - but still work.

Author: committed but also added some more word smithing to make clear below. hope this helps customers!

> In Terraform MongoDB Atlas Provider v1.10.0, some improvements were introduced which mainly focus on the MongoDB Atlas Programmatic API Keys (PAK) handling. The improvements introduce a much more sustainable way to manage PAK project assignment lifecycle over the long term versus being embedded in the project resource.  This guide will help you to transition smoothly from the previous version which this resource was first released (v1.8.0) to the new version (v1.10.0).

Author: ```suggestion
In Terraform MongoDB Atlas Provider v1.10.0, we've focused on refining the management of MongoDB Atlas Programmatic API Keys (PAK) for enhanced sustainability and ease of use over the long term. Hence, rather than embedding the PAK project assignment lifecycle in the `mongodbatlas_project` resource, as done previously, we've implemented a more efficient and intuitive assignment process by including in `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource. This guide aims to provide you with a smooth transition from the initial release version of PAK management in v1.8.0 to the new version as part of v1.10.0.
```

For comprehensive Upgrade Guide on all v1.10.0 modifications see [here](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/1.10.0-upgrade-guide). 

Remember, your scripts will still work with deprecated features for now, but it's best to upgrade as soon as possible to benefit from the latest enhancements. Code removal is planned for v1.12.0 at which point prior PAK workflow will no longer function.

> Lastly, in MongoDB Atlas, all PAKs are Organization API keys. Once created, a PAK is linked at the organization level with an 'Organization Member' role. However, these Organization API keys can also be assigned to one or more projects within the organization. When a PAK is assigned to a specific project, it essentially takes on the 'Project Owner' role for that particular project. This enables the key to perform operations at the project level, in addition to the organization level. The flexibility of PAKs provides a mechanism for fine-grained access and control, once their functioning is clearly understood.

Reviewer: This is such a hard thing to explain.  I really wish our API was a bit more like our UI.  But since it's not and with the sames we have I think we could make this a bit clearer. Gave it a try here:
```suggestion
Lastly, in MongoDB Atlas, all PAKs are Organization API keys. Once created, a PAK is linked at the organization level with at minimum the 'Organization Member' role. However, these Organization API keys can also be assigned to one or more projects within the organization. When a PAK is assigned to a specific project, it essentially becomes a Project level PAK for that particular project. This enables the key to perform operations at the project level with project specific roles, in addition to the organization level. The flexibility of PAKs provides a mechanism for fine-grained access and control, once their functioning is clearly understood.  
```

For comprehensive Upgrade Guide on all v1.10.0 modifications see [here](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs/guides/1.10.0-upgrade-guide). 

## Changes Overview
* `api_keys` parameter is deprecated from the `mongodbatlas_project` resource.
* The `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource is extended to include a `project_assignment` parameter.

## Upgrade Steps

**1. Backup Current Terraform State File**

Before you begin any modification process, it is always important to backup your current Terraform State file. This is necessary in case anything goes wrong, and you need to revert to the previous state.

**2. Saftely remove resource `mongodbatlas_project` from Terraform State**

Locate the `mongodbatlas_project` resource block containtaining the `api_keys` parameter in your state file that you wish to migrate to new workflow introduced in v1.10.0 of Terraform Provider for MongoDB Atlas. From there you can remove it from Terraform State file. This means that assignments of the `api_keys` parameter as well as project resource itself will be preserved in the actual infrastructure, but Terraform will no longer manage them.

> For example if this was your current `mongodbatlas_project` resource block:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, if this was your current `mongodbatlas_project` resource block:
```

Remember, your scripts will still work with deprecated features for now, but it's best to upgrade as soon as possible to benefit from the latest enhancements. Code removal is planned for v1.12.0 at which point prior PAK workflow will no longer function.

> Lastly, in MongoDB Atlas, all PAKs are Organization API keys. Once created, a PAK are linked at the organization level with an 'Organization Member' role. However, these Organization API keys can also be assigned to one or more projects within the organization. When a PAK is assigned to a specific project, it essentially takes on the 'Project Owner' role for that particular project. This enables the key to perform operations at the project level, in addition to the organization level. The flexibility of PAKs provides a powerful mechanism for fine-grained access and control, once their functioning is clearly understood.

Author: ```suggestion
Lastly, in MongoDB Atlas, all PAKs are Organization API keys. Once created, a PAK is linked at the organization level with an 'Organization Member' role. However, these Organization API keys can also be assigned to one or more projects within the organization. When a PAK is assigned to a specific project, it essentially takes on the 'Project Owner' role for that particular project. This enables the key to perform operations at the project level, in addition to the organization level. The flexibility of PAKs provides a powerful mechanism for fine-grained access and control, once their functioning is clearly understood.
```
